Apart from the obvious tragedy, the Charlie Hebdo killings manifest the baseline that Muslim identity is only relevant - and indeed newsworthy - when the subject is standing behind the gun.
Islam's size, and demographical rise, has spurred some of the most draconian policies against Muslims in modern times.
Expectedly, the religious expression bans disparately impacted French Muslims.
The state aim of compelling secularisation upon its Muslim citizenry was based upon the civilisational binary, and ultimatum, to choose between "Islam and the West", "Muslim lands or France".
Collateral indictment of French Muslims, by politicians and media alike, infused with an already fervent culture of Islamophobia on the ground, will surely incite violent backlash against Muslims and Muslim communities in the country.
The conflation of the terrorist's acts with France's Muslim population, from the perspective of hatemongers, holds the latter vicariously liable.
In addition, focusing on the heroics of Merabat, instead of the evil of the three terrorists, asserts - and inserts - a competing narrative that France's Muslims are everyday citizens: Citizens with jobs, families, and interpretations of Islam that condemn violence, and contradict the malignant caricature of the faith constructed by the state.
He, in both life and especially in death, stands as an archetype for the overwhelming majority of French Muslims.
A law-abiding citizen, Merabat harmonised his religious identity with the responsibilities of being a Frenchman.
He was both French and Muslim, an existential integration eviscerated by the longstanding Islamophobic discourse in France, and ignored by the media firestorm following the attack.
Inserting him into the story, and countering the barrage of vile Muslim representations with a rebuttal of victimhood and valour, will likely save lives in France.
Most importantly, retelling the story from the perspective of Ahmed Merabat will not only reveal that Muslim and French identity are reconcilable, but also resilient.