Let’s recruit academically gifted students from poor neighborhoods the same way we seek out star athletes
A recent report , according to Reuters, finds that “more than 3,000 students at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill received credit for fake classes over an 18-year period as part of a program that allowed many of them to remain eligible to play sports.”  
We should not be focusing on how the university broke the rules of college sports for almost 20 years by sending thousands of athletes to no-show classes to keep players eligible for play.
The real question is far more basic: Why do so many colleges treat their star athletes better than their star students?
Student athletes are sought out; once identified they are actively recruited; admission comes with generous scholarships and once admitted students are pampered with better housing, free or subsidized food and special college counseling to help them adjust to college life.
We simply aren’t doing enough to help academically gifted students who have financial need to offset the challenges of attending college.
Ironically, the way big-time college athletes are recruited offers solutions to address this problem.
We should seek out talented students from poor backgrounds the way athletics coaches search for high school athletes.
Coaches know part of their job is to find and cultivate talent, so they send scouts to take in countless high school games looking for the next Tom Brady.
What if colleges had academic scouts to scour science fairs, mathematics competitions, art shows, and school plays seeking out the super smart, highly-diligent, poor kid?
For many low-income, academically-gifted students, a paid college visit, especially one catered to their academic interests, is completely out of reach.
So he attended Mississippi Valley State University, where he was finally recognized and went on to have one of the best football careers of all time.
And what if today we fail to recognize academic talent in poor neighborhoods, never developing the whiz kids?
He left the bulk of a fortune from owning the Redskins to start the largest academic scholarship foundation in America— to find low-income, exceptional students who beat the odds.