Let’s recruit academically gifted students from poor neighborhoods the same way we seek out star athletes
We should not be focusing on how the university broke the rules of college sports for almost 20 years by sending thousands of athletes to no-show classes to keep players eligible for play.
The real question is far more basic: Why do so many colleges treat their star athletes better than their star students?
The comparison between how colleges treat athletes and high performing, low- income students is particularly revealing.
Student athletes are sought out; once identified they are actively recruited; admission comes with generous scholarships and once admitted students are pampered with better housing, free or subsidized food and special college counseling to help them adjust to college life.
We simply aren’t doing enough to help academically gifted students who have financial need to offset the challenges of attending college.
Many factors contribute to this disparity, but one of the most significant obstacles preventing high-achieving, low-income students from attaining their full potential is they exist in isolation in high school.
There is no football coach or athletic counselor for these kids; they are on their own to develop a college selection strategy, navigate the maze of loan forms and develop a college budget.
We should seek out talented students from poor backgrounds the way athletics coaches search for high school athletes.
Admissions counselors often visit schools in wealthy suburbs, where most of the best students are college-bound anyway.
What if colleges had academic scouts to scour science fairs, mathematics competitions, art shows, and school plays seeking out the super smart, highly-diligent, poor kid?
For example, when I was Schools Chancellor, one New York high school had a single college counselor for 2,000 students.
For many low-income, academically-gifted students, a paid college visit, especially one catered to their academic interests, is completely out of reach.
By placing athletics ahead of academics, however, many colleges are making profoundly poor choices.