Unlike 50 years ago, when a tiny, socially elite proportion went to university, they will be joining almost 50% of their peers in studying for a degree, facing average costs of upwards of £46k for a three-year degree, including tuition and living costs, compared with the generous grants available up until the 1990s.
Setting expansion aside, it is remarkable how much hasn’t changed: at the heart of the system remains a core model of young people moving away to university to study for three-year full-time degrees; an expensive route for which they now bear much of the costs themselves.
Little wonder, then, that average fees are far higher than the £6,000 a year that the then universities minister, David Willetts, predicted when he introduced the £9,000 fee cap.
There is too little accountability for this variation within the powerful sector: universities award their own degrees; the sector is opaque, even resisting moves to publish comparable information on the amount of teaching students can expect for their fees; and the higher education regulator is weak, with virtually no powers to tell universities to buck up standards.
Moocs will not transform the sector until they are embraced by the most prestigious universities: why shouldn’t you be able to study for a cut-price Oxford degree, half via YouTube and Skype, and half among the dreaming spires?
Other innovations that could bring down costs without sacrificing quality might be a restructure of the system to standardise first-year curriculums, enabling young people to combine studying for a year or two at their local university with a year or two on campus at a more specialist institution.
We could see more professional degrees co-delivered and funded by universities and employers, such as the accountancy degree offered by Durham and KPMG in which young people benefit from six years of combined university and work experience.
University could be combined with more modern ways of adjusting to adulthood: for example, a year spent in a structured volunteering programme, such as that offered by the charity City Year, offers huge opportunities to develop the grit and teamwork so valued by today’s employers, while making a real contribution to schools and other public services.
There are lessons from the 1960s, when Harold Wilson’s government realised that the only way to increase access in the face of a reluctant sector was to back Michael Young’s vision for a new institution, the Open University, which increased the student population by Britain by a fifth when it was launched via its distance learning degrees.
It needs to foster a conversation with universities, students and employers about what it means to get a degree.
They deserve the best possible learning experience for the significant time and money they will invest in their degrees: it’s critical we don’t shy away from a challenge to universities to ensure their ivory towers continue to evolve to keep pace with the world around them.