Setting expansion aside, it is remarkable how much hasn’t changed: at the heart of the system remains a core model of young people moving away to university to study for three-year full-time degrees; an expensive route for which they now bear much of the costs themselves.
Graduates are now responsible for forging their own careers in a fluid market compared with the jobs for life that were the norm a few decades ago and employers are demanding a completely different set of skills.
The debate about whether the 50% participation target is too high has been similarly staid: surely it’s a no-brainer to hope that at least half of young people engage in advanced learning.
One of the purported benefits of marketising higher education was that the market itself would deliver innovation and better value.
We now have the nonsense of a market where students pay the same for very different amounts and quality of academic provision.
There is too little accountability for this variation within the powerful sector: universities award their own degrees; the sector is opaque, even resisting moves to publish comparable information on the amount of teaching students can expect for their fees; and the higher education regulator is weak, with virtually no powers to tell universities to buck up standards.
Other innovations that could bring down costs without sacrificing quality might be a restructure of the system to standardise first-year curriculums, enabling young people to combine studying for a year or two at their local university with a year or two on campus at a more specialist institution.
We could see more professional degrees co-delivered and funded by universities and employers, such as the accountancy degree offered by Durham and KPMG in which young people benefit from six years of combined university and work experience.
University could be combined with more modern ways of adjusting to adulthood: for example, a year spent in a structured volunteering programme, such as that offered by the charity City Year, offers huge opportunities to develop the grit and teamwork so valued by today’s employers, while making a real contribution to schools and other public services.
There are lessons from the 1960s, when Harold Wilson’s government realised that the only way to increase access in the face of a reluctant sector was to back Michael Young’s vision for a new institution, the Open University, which increased the student population by Britain by a fifth when it was launched via its distance learning degrees.
One way of doing this would be to separate degree-awarding powers from learning provision, as suggested by the Social Market Foundation.